<div style="text-align: justify">

# 1. Importance of Accessibility and Good HTML Structure - V

## 1.21. What are the accessibility benefits for good link text, and what are examples of good link text?

Let's take a look at the benefits of writing good link texts in the context of accessibility, and some examples of good link texts.

The first visible benefit of a good link text is that it makes it easier for everyone to find information quickly. Descriptive links help users know where they're headed and what they'll access. This ensures the user doesn't feel lost and improves the overall user experience.

For those using screen readers, a clear and descriptive link text is a must. Screen readers read the link text aloud, so a text like "Read our accessibility guide" is way better than "Click here."

Making link text clear and descriptive isn't just beneficial for those living with visual impairments. Descriptive links also help people with cognitive disabilities by providing clear context.

Here are some best practices to keep in mind while writing link texts:

*   Make sure links are visually distinct by using underlining and other visual cues, so users can easily identify and navigate them.
*   Avoid generic link texts like "here", "click here", and "more-info" as they don't provide any useful information.
*   Aim for concise and descriptive link texts, ideally between 2-5 words, that convey the link's purpose.
*   Avoid jargon and abbreviations that users may not understand.
*   Focus on the destination, not the action. For example, "user behavior results", instead of "click here to read more".
*   Don’t repeat the same link text for different destinations.
*   Place links in a way that they make sense within the surrounding text. For example, "for more details, visit our events page" instead of "Click here for more".

Here are some examples of good link texts for specific use cases, compared to less helpful ones. Let's say you want to link to a page providing details about an event like this:

```html
<a href="webinar-details-link">Details</a>
```
    

`Details` is vague and doesn’t provide specific information about what the user will find if they click the link. Without additional context, users might not know if the link leads to details about a webinar, a product, a policy, or something else.

Now, here is an example of good link text:

```html
<a href="webinar-details-link">
    Get details about our upcoming webinar
</a>
```
    

This link text gives users context about the content they will find, making it easier to decide whether they want to click on it. It reduces ambiguity by specifying that the link is related to a webinar.

Here is an another example linking to a post in a blog:

```html
<a href="/blog-post-link">Read more</a>
```
    

The link text `Read more` is not ideal in terms of accessibility because it lacks context.

Here is a better link text example:

```html
<a href="/blog-post-link">
    Read our latest blog post on web accessibility
</a>
```
    

This updated link text provides users with a clearer idea of what to expect and why they might want to click the link, which is particularly important for those using screen readers.

Let's take a look at one more example. Let's say you want to provide more information about a certain topic:

```html
<a href="/link-to-topic">More info</a>
```
    

`More info` is also vague and can be problematic for accessibility. It doesn't provide specific details about the link's destination, which can be confusing for users relying on screen readers or those who might be navigating the site in a non-linear way.

Here is a better example for link text:

```html
<a href="/link-to-topic">
    Learn more about our accessibility efforts
</a>
```
    

This updated link text is better because it clearly describes what the user will find if they click the link. Users can immediately understand that the link leads to information about your accessibility efforts.

## 1.22. What are good ways to make audio and video content accessible?

Multimedia, especially video, has become the go-to format for sharing information online.

With this surge in content, there's a growing need to ensure everyone can access and enjoy video and audio content online, irrespective of their abilities or environment.

Making your audio and video content accessible isn't just a nice-to-have, it's essential for reaching a wider audience. Let's look at some inexpensive ways to make your video and audio content more accessible.

A video is not just about visuals but also audio, so the first thing you should consider doing is adding captions or subtitles to your video content.

Captions provide the text version of spoken words and important non-verbal sounds, like music or laughter, synchronized with the video.

Subtitles on the other hand are essential for people who don't understand the language you're speaking. This helps not only people who are deaf or hard of hearing but also those watching videos in noisy or quiet environments.

To add captions or subtitles to your video or audio content, you can use the `track` element inside your `video` or `audio` element:

```html
<!-- Video -->
<video controls src="video.mp4">
    <track
        src="captions.vtt" 
        kind="captions"
        srclang="en"
        label="English" 
    />
</video>

<!-- Audio -->
<audio controls src="audio.mp3">
    <track
        src="captions.vtt"
        kind="captions"
        srclang="en"
        label="English"
    />
</audio>
```
    

The `kind` attribute is used to tell the track element how it should be used. Valid values for the `kind` attribute include `captions`, `subtitles`, `chapters`, and `metadata`.

The `srclang` attribute represents the language for the `track` content. The `label` attribute is a descriptive title for the text track that browsers use to identify and display it in the list of available text tracks.

Another important thing to consider is providing a transcript for your audio and video content. A transcript is a text version of all the spoken words in your audio or video. Unlike captions, transcripts don’t need to be synchronized with the media. Transcripts are useful for deaf people and those hard of hearing. They're also beneficial for people who prefer reading instead of watching or listening. Transcripts also make your content searchable, allowing users to quickly find specific parts of your audio or video. If you have a video or audio on a website, you can simply add the captions below the audio or video:

```html
<audio controls>
    <source src="audio.mp3" />
    Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>

<!-- Transcript -->
<h3>Transcript</h3>
<p>
    [Speaker 1]: Welcome to the tutorial on making accessible content
</p>
<p>
    [Speaker 2]: Today, we'll cover captions, transcripts, and more.
</p>

<!-- Rest of transcript -->
 ```
    

If you're publishing videos on a video-sharing platform like YouTube or Vimeo, they have automatic captions and transcripts for videos. But if you're not satisfied, you can use services like veed.io, Rev, Amara, and Descript.

Other ways to make your video and audio content accessible include:

*   Adding a sign language overlay for videos for deaf people and those hard of hearing.
*   Providing volume and speed controls.
*   Ensuring good contrast for on-screen text.
*   Offering multiple formats.


## 1.23. What are some ways to make web applications keyboard accessible?

Many users rely on keyboards instead of mice due to physical disabilities, repetitive strain injuries, or personal preference. This includes users of screen readers and those who may not have a working mouse. Keyboard accessibility ensures these users can navigate web applications effectively without barriers.

Let's look at some practical techniques you can employ to make web applications keyboard accessible.

Many users use the `Tab` key to navigate through interactive elements on a webpage. The `tabindex` attribute is used to make elements focusable and define the relative order in which they should be navigated using the keyboard. It takes a numerical value, which can be positive, zero, or negative.

Here is the basic syntax:

```html
<element tabindex="number">Element Text</element>
```
    

It is important to never use the `tabindex` attribute with a value greater than `0`. Instead, you should either use a value of `0` or `-1`.

You can set the `tabindex` to `-1` to allow it to receive programmatic focus. This is used in a variety of situations for "focus management", such as when you need to set the focus on a heading, error message, or dialog, or you are building custom components such as tabbing interfaces or tree components.

```html
<p tabindex="-1">Sorry, there was an error with your submission.</p>
```
    

Setting `tabindex` to `0` allows you to add an element that does not receive keyboard focus by default into the page's natural tab order. This allows keyboard users to `Tab` to the element. This is primarily used when building custom elements that need keyboard functionality.

```html
<div role="combobox" tabindex="0">
```
    

`accesskey` is another attribute you can use to make your web project keyboard accessible. It allows you to define a key that focuses on or activates a particular element:

```html
<button accesskey="s">Save</button>
<button accesskey="c">Cancel</button>
<a href="index.html" accesskey="h">Home</a>
```
    

In the above code:

*   `accesskey="s"` assigns the key `S` to the `Save` button. On most browsers, pressing `ALT + S` (on Windows) and `CTRL + Option + S` (on Mac) will activate this button.
*   `accesskey="c"` sets the key `C` to the `Cancel` button, allowing users to activate it using `ALT + C` (Windows) and `CTRL + Option + C` (Mac).
*   `accesskey="h"` assigns the key `H` to the `Home` link, allowing users to navigate to the homepage using `ALT + H` (Windows) and `CTRL + Option + H` (Mac).

Please note that the exact key combination to activate the accesskey might vary depending on the browser and operating system. It's typically `ALT + Specified Key` on Windows and `CTRL + Option + Specified Key` on Mac.

Another way to make the keyboard accessible in your apps is to make sure you provide clear focus indicators. If you feel the default browser focus indicator is not enough, you can override it by targeting the focus state of the element.

Here is an example of styling the focus state for an HTML element:

```css
element:focus {
    outline: 2px solid #005fcc;
}
```
    

The `outline` property is used to define the outline around the element. This example sets the outline to a solid blue line with 2 pixels set for the thickness. The focus indicator should be styled in a way that makes it obvious which element currently has focus. In order to be accessible, the indicator must have a minimum color contrast of at least 3:1 with the background color it covers.

You should also avoid keyboard traps, which occur when a user cannot move focus away from a certain element in components like modals and popups.

</div>