# 1. Importance of Accessibility and Good HTML Structure - III

## 1.11. What is the purpose of WAI-ARIA, and how does it work?

Making static content accessible can be relatively straightforward, but dynamic content can be more challenging. This is where WAI-ARIA comes in.

Let's look at what WAI-ARIA is, its purpose, how it works, and some examples.

WAI-ARIA stands for Web Accessibility Initiative - Accessible Rich Internet Applications. It's a specification that enhances accessibility for dynamic content and UI (User Interface) components.

Note that WCAG and WAI-ARIA are not the same. WCAG provides general guidelines for web accessibility, while WAI-ARIA offers specific rules for making dynamic and interactive content accessible for users of assistive technologies.

So, the primary purpose of WAI-ARIA is to improve accessibility for dynamic content and UI components that do not have native HTML equivalents.

WAI-ARIA works by introducing a set of attributes you can add to HTML elements to provide additional semantic information. These attributes are categorized into roles, states, and properties.

ARIA role defines the purpose of an element within a website or web app. Here is an example of setting the role to `button` for a `div` element.

```html
<div role="button">Click Me</div>
```
    

By doing this you are indicating to assistive technology that the element is a button. Roles do not provide any functionality however. Merely giving this `div` a `role` of `button` will not make it act like a button. To make it look and behave like a button you would need to use CSS and JavaScript to get the desired result. It is always better to use the native `button` or `input` element with `type="button"` instead.

Since HTML alone does not provide a way to make custom UI components like tabbed navigation (tab list) accessible, ARIA roles can be very helpful.

Here's what a tablist could look like with the `role` attribute:

```html
<div role="tablist" aria-label="Football Match Dashboard">
    <button
        role="tab"
        aria-selected="true"
        aria-controls="match-info-panel"
        id="match-info-tab">
        Match Info
    </button>

    <button
        role="tab"
        aria-selected="false"
        aria-controls="player-stats-panel"
        id="player-stats-tab">
        Player Stats
    </button>
</div>
```
    

Each tab in the tablist will have an associated tab panel that will display when its tab is selected. Each tab panel will have a `role` of `tabpanel`.

Here's what each of those tab panels could look like:

```html
<div 
    role="tabpanel"
    id="match-info-panel" 
    aria-labelledby="match-info-tab"
>
    <p>
        Details about the match, including date,
        time, venue, and current score.
    </p>
</div>

<div
    role="tabpanel"
    id="player-stats-panel"
    aria-labelledby="player-stats-tab"
    hidden
>
    <p>
        Individual player statistics such as goals,
        assists, and minutes played.
    </p>
</div>
```

ARIA state describes the current status of an element, which can change based on user interactions. An example is the `aria-expanded` attribute for collapsible sections:

```html
<button aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="more-info">
    More Info
</button>

<div id="more-info" hidden>
    <p>This is additional information.</p>
</div>
```
    

Again, this is merely describing the state, it does not provide any functionality. You would have to use JavaScript to change the state of the attribute when the user clicks the button.

ARIA properties provide additional details about elements. For example, the `aria-labelledby` property lets you connect an element to a specific label:

```html
<h2 id="header-id">About freeCodeCamp</h2>
<button id="button-id" aria-labelledby="header-id button-id">Learn More</button>
```
    

This will make the elements understandable and navigable for users of assistive technologies.

To get the best out of WAI-ARIA, try to stick with native HTML whenever possible since it generally provides more accessibility out of the box.

Use WAI-ARIA only when HTML falls short, and don’t forget to test with assistive technologies like screen readers, or have people with disabilities test your work. Also, make sure your WAI-ARIA states and properties update with the content in real time. Avoid overusing ARIA as it can be confusing many times.

## 1.12. What are ARIA roles?

ARIA stands for Accessible Rich Internet Applications.

ARIA roles specify the semantic meaning of HTML elements. They're essential for making web content accessible to people who use assistive technologies, like screen readers.

HTML has semantic and non-semantic elements, based on whether they convey meaning about their content.

Many semantic HTML elements already have an ARIA role assigned by default. For example, the `button` element has a default ARIA role of `button`.

But non-semantic elements don't have a role. For example, screen readers will not know how to interpret the purpose of a `div` if you don't specify its role explicitly.

To specify the ARIA role of an element, you just need to add the `role` attribute, like this `role="ARIA role"`, where value is the name of a role in the ARIA specification.

It is important to note that specifying a role on an element only does one thing: It informs assistive technology of the purpose of the element. It does not add any functionality or behavior to the element. If people expect a role to behave a certain way, it is up to you, the developer, to add that expected behavior. For example, adding a `role` of `button` to a `div` does not automatically make it clickable with a mouse or usable with a keyboard. It is the responsibility of the developer to add the expected behavior that allows the `div` to act like a button, and in most cases, it is just better to use the `button` element.

There are six main categories of ARIA roles:

*   Document structure roles
*   Widget roles
*   Landmark roles
*   Live region roles
*   Window roles
*   And Abstract roles

Let's take a look at them in more detail.

Document structure roles define the overall structure of the web page. With these roles, assistive technologies can understand the relationships between different sections and help users navigate the content.

However, most of the document structure roles are not used in modern web development because browsers already support equivalent semantic HTML elements, which should be prioritized whenever possible.

You should specify the roles that don't have an equivalent semantic element. For example: `toolbar`, `tooltip`, `feed`, `math`, `presentation`, `none`, and `note`.

There are other similar roles but these are the most commonly used ones. This is an example of a `div` with the `math` ARIA role. The `div` contains a mathematical equation.

```html
<div role="math" aria-label="x squared + y squared = 3">
    x<sup>2</sup> + y<sup>2</sup> = 3
</div>
```
    

You'll also notice that the `div` has an `aria-label` attribute. The value of this attribute should be a string that represents the expression.

Widget roles define the purpose and functionality of interactive elements, like scrollbars.

Examples of widget roles include `scrollbar`, `searchbox`, `separator` (when focusable), `slider`, `spinbutton`, `switch`, `tab`, `tabpanel`, and `treeitem`.

Some of these roles have equivalent semantic elements. You should prioritize the semantic element over the role if there is one. For example, you should favor using the HTML `button` element over adding a `role` of `button` to a `div`.

Landmark roles classify and label the primary sections of a web page. Screen readers use them to provide convenient navigation to important sections of a page. You should use them sparingly to keep the overall layout simple and easy to understand. Examples of landmark roles are `banner`, `complementary`, `contentinfo`, `form`, `main`, `navigation`, `region`, and `search`. Each of these roles has a corresponding HTML equivalent, such as `header`, `footer`, `aside`, `form`, `main`, `nav`, `section`, and `search`. If you use the proper HTML elements to define the sections of your page then it is not necessary to explicitly add the `role` attribute to these elements.

Live region roles define elements with content that will change dynamically. This way, screen readers and other assistive technologies can announce changes to users with visual disabilities. These roles include: `alert`, `log`, `marquee`, `status`, and `timer`.

Window roles define sub-windows, like pop up modal dialogues. These roles include `alertdialog` and `dialog`. Please note that it is now considered a best practice to use the HTML `dialog` element and its associated JavaScript methods instead of manually creating a dialog.

And finally, we have abstract roles. These roles help organize the document. They're only meant to be used internally by the browser, not by developers, so you should know that they exist but you shouldn't use them on your websites or web applications.

With ARIA roles, you can create accessible and inclusive websites and web applications. They provide semantic information about the purpose and function of HTML elements.

Screen readers and other assistive technologies use this information to help users understand the content of your page and set expectations for how to use it, which helps ensure that everyone can have a great user experience.

## 1.13. What are the roles of the `aria-label` and `aria-labelledby` attributes?

It is important to make sure that all users, including those living with disabilities, can access websites without issues.

For people using screen readers, the `aria-label` and `aria-labelledby` attributes provide crucial information about page elements that might be unclear or invisible.

Let's look at what the `aria-label` and `aria-labelledby` attributes are and the roles they play in making the web accessible to people with visual impairments and related disabilities.

You'll notice both `aria-label` and `aria-labelledby` are prefixed with aria. So what does that mean? ARIA stands for Accessible Rich Internet Applications. It's a set of attributes prefixed with `aria-`, which lets developers communicate the purpose of elements to assistive technologies. The `aria-label` attribute is an invisible label for interactive elements. It adds a text label to an element that screen readers can read.

`aria-label` is especially useful for elements that do not have visible text but still need to be described by screen readers. For example, buttons with only icons often need `aria-label` to convey their purpose.

Here is an example:

```html
<button aria-label="Search">
    <i class="fas fa-search"></i>
</button>
```
    

In this case, a screen reader may announce this button as `Search, button`, even though the button only contains an icon. The `aria-label` attribute tells screen readers what text to use in place of the icon.

If the button contained the text "Search" instead of an icon, then there would be no need for the `aria-label` attribute as the text would provide the label for the button.

For input elements, the `aria-label` attribute provides a label directly if there isn't a visible label associated with the input.

The `aria-labelledby` attribute does the exact same thing as the `aria-label` attribute, but instead of defining the text directly in the attribute, you use a reference to text that already exists on the page. The existing text must have an `id` attribute, which will be used for the reference value in the `aria-labelledby` attribute.

Here's an example:

```html
<input type="text" aria-labelledby="search-btn">
<button type="button" id="search-btn">Search</button>
```


In this case, the text for the button is being used as the label for the search input. Screen readers will announce the input as something like `Search, edit`. If you later decide you want to change the button text to `Find`, the label for the input will automatically be updated to the new text since it is referencing the button text. Combining multiple `id` values into a single `aria-labelledby` attribute value is also possible. Here's how that works:

```html
<div>
    <span id="volume-label">Volume</span>
    <span id="volume-details">Adjust the volume level</span>
    <input
    type="range"
    min="0"
    max="100"
    value="30"
    aria-labelledby="volume-label volume-details">
</div>
```
    

For the slider, the screen reader will look out for the content of the `volume-label` and `volume-details` elements and announce `Volume Adjust the volume level`.

You've seen that both `aria-label` and `aria-labelledby` attributes help screen readers understand what elements do. So, which one should you use? Since they both provide the same functionality, either can be used, but there may be a few advantages to using `aria-labelledby` over `aria-label`:

*   If someone is using a translation service to translate the content on your page, the text in an `aria-label` attribute may not always be translated.
*   Using `aria-labelledby` can also help prevent a mismatch between the visible label text and the invisible label for screen reader users since updating the visible text will automatically update the invisible label.
*   `aria-labelledby` can make it much easier to programmatically create complex invisible labels consisting of multiple sources of text.

One last note, do not use `aria-label` and `aria-labelledby` on an element at the same time. In this case, the invisible label for screen readers will always be determined by `aria-labelledby` and `aria-label` will be completely ignored.

## 1.14. What is the `aria-hidden` attribute, and how does it work?

If you ever need to display content while at the same time hiding it from people who use assistive technology, like screen readers, you can use the `aria-hidden` attribute.

You just need to add it to the HTML element that you want to hide and set its value to `true`, like you can see over here: `aria-hidden="true"`.

This attribute hides the element and all of its children from the accessibility tree, while keeping them visible on the page. Common use cases include:

*   Icons and images that only have a decorative purpose.
*   Duplicated content.

It is important to remember that `aria-hidden` only hides content from assistive technology, such as screen readers. If the content should be hidden from everyone, then you should not use `aria-hidden` to hide it. For example, a hamburger menu that is currently collapsed must be hidden from all keyboard users, not just screen reader users. In this case you could set the CSS `display` property to `none` on the menu to remove it from the DOM when it is collapsed.

You should never use `aria-hidden` to hide an element that is focusable with the keyboard. The `aria-hidden` attribute only removes the element from the accessibility tree. It does not remove it from the DOM. Thus, it will still be possible for screen reader users to tab to the element, but their screen reader will not announce the element, effectively causing them to focus on "nothing".

Here's an example where we hide an icon from the accessibility tree by adding the `aria-hidden` attribute with a value of `true`.

We only keep the text exposed to assistive technologies to avoid any confusion that may arise from the redundancy of having both an icon and text for the same purpose.

```html
<button>
    <i class="fa-solid fa-gear" aria-hidden="true"></i>
    <span class="label">Settings</span>
</button>
```
    

You do not need to use `aria-hidden` when:

*   The HTML element already has a `hidden` attribute.
*   The element or the element's ancestor is already hidden with `display: none`.
*   The element or the element's ancestor is already hidden with `visibility: hidden`.

In these three cases, the element is already removed from the DOM and thus hidden from the accessibility tree, so the `aria-hidden` attribute is not necessary.

As with using any aria attributes, you should always test with assistive technologies, and preferably having people with disabilities test your work, to make sure that it's easy to understand, even with these hidden elements.

You should also know that setting `aria-hidden` to `false` will not expose the element to assistive technologies if any of its parents has this attribute set to `true`.

The `aria-hidden` attribute is used to hide elements from people who use assistive technology, such as screen reader users.

While it can be helpful for hiding purely decorative elements and duplicated content, it should be used sparingly to avoid hindering accessibility.

In general, all content and functionality available on the page should also be available to people using assistive technology. The use case for `aria-hidden` is very narrow and should be limited primarily to making the experience cleaner for screen reader users by removing purely decorative or duplicate information. Do not use `aria-hidden` to hide content that you don’t think screen reader users would be interested in. Screen reader users deserve to have access to all information on the page.

By following these best practices and testing the user experience, you can create inclusive online experiences for everyone.

## 1.15. What is the `aria-expanded` attribute, and how does it work?

The `aria-expanded` attribute is used for accessibility purposes to indicate if a control is expanded or collapsed. It's used in conjunction with collapsible widgets like menus, accordions and other disclosure widgets that control the visibility of content. The `aria-expanded` attribute is set to `true` if the control is expanded, or `false` if it is collapsed.

The information provided by `aria-expanded` allows people using screen readers to understand the current state of the control (whether it is expanded or collapsed).

The `aria-expanded` attribute is applied to the interactive element that toggles the visibility of a collapsible widget. For example, if a button toggles an expandable menu, the `aria-expanded` attribute is placed on the button.

When the menu is expanded, the `aria-expanded` attribute should be set to `true` like in this example:

```html
<button aria-expanded="true">Menu</button>
```
    

When the menu is collapsed, it should be set to `false` instead.

```html
<button aria-expanded="false">Menu</button>
```
    

You must always have the `aria-expanded` attribute set to either `true` or `false` on the controlling element. For example, if a button toggles the visibility of a menu, the default value for `aria-expanded` should be based on the default visibility of the menu.

If the menu is expanded by default, `aria-expanded` should initially be set to `true`. If the menu is collapsed by default, `aria-expanded` should initially be set of `false`.

The value of `aria-expanded` should be updated dynamically using JavaScript as the user interacts with the element.

Additionally, the properties, `aria-controls` and `aria-owns` can be used in combination with `aria-expanded` to establish a programmatic connection between the controlling element and the element it controls.

Let's start with `aria-controls`. When used with `aria-expanded`, the `aria-controls` attribute is used to specify the element being controlled. For example, a button might expand or collapse a list acting as a menu. The value of `aria-controls` will be the `id` of the controlled element (the menu list in this example).

```html
<button aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="menu1">Menu</button>
<ul id="menu1">
    <li>...</li>
    <li>...</li>
</ul>
```
    

Notice that the list immediately follows the controlling button. For expandable controls like this, it is best to have the expanded content immediately follow the element that controls it in the DOM. This prevents screen reader users from having to search for the expanded content, and makes it easier for keyboard users to navigate through any interactive controls in the expanded content.

If it is not possible to place the expanded content immediately after the controlling element, the `aria-owns` attribute allows you to virtually move it after the control in the accessibility tree. This allows assistive technology like screen readers to pretend the expanded content is placed directly after the control in the DOM.

```html
<button aria-owns="menu1" aria-expanded="true">Menu</button>
<main>
    <!-- an entire page worth of content --->
</main>
<ul id="menu1">
    <li>...</li>
    <li>...</li>
</ul>
```

There are drawbacks to using the `aria-owns` attribute. It creates unnecessary verbosity for screen reader users since most screen readers will automatically read out the entire contents of the expanded element when first expanded. It also does not change the tab order, potentially forcing keyboard users to tab through all of the other interactive controls on the page before reaching the expanded content, unless you manage the tabbing order with JavaScript.

Ideally, the expandable content should be placed after the control element, and the `aria-owns` attribute should only be used in a worst case scenario when that is not possible. If it must be used, you will need to thoroughly test with a wide range of screen readers and browsers to ensure that your implementation is accessible for everyone.

And just a reminder, when you use either `aria-controls` or `aria-owns`, the value of `aria-expanded` must continue to be updated as the control is expanded and collapsed.

The `aria-expanded` attribute indicates whether a control is expanded or collapsed. This information is essential for screen reader users, helping them understand the current state of collapsible elements like menus, accordions, and other similar disclosure widgets.

By using `aria-expanded` correctly, you can create an intuitive user experience for everyone.