<div style="text-align: justify">

# 2. Understanding the Event Object and Event Delegation

## 2.1. What is the `change` event and how does it work?

The `change` event is a special event which is fired when the user modifies the value of certain input elements. More specifically:
*   When a checkbox is ticked or unticked.
    
*   When a radio button is ticked.
    
*   When the user makes a selection from something like a date picker or dropdown menu.
    
*   When an input loses focus (the user tabs to the next field, or clicks out of the form) after the user has changed the value.
    
*   When the user otherwise confirms the value, such as by hitting enter after typing some text.
    
Note that the `change` event does NOT fire when your user types in an input. The `change` event will only fire after they have focused on another element.

The `change` event still generates an `Event` object, but unlike most other events it does not generate a custom implementation – the only properties and methods you will have access to are those on the base `Event` object.

This differs from the `input` event, which generates a dedicated `InputEvent` object. The change event also differs in a few ways. An `input` event WILL trigger when a user types content into a field, for example.

These differences are important to remember, as you might get tripped up by the timing of these events firing.

## 2.2. How do event bubbling and event delegation work?

Event bubbling, or propagation, refers to how an event "bubbles up" to parent objects when triggered. For example, consider this code:

```html
<p>
  <span>Click me~!</span>
</p>
```

The `p` element here would be considered the parent of the `span` element.
When you click on the `span` element, like you are instructed to, the `span` element becomes the target of a `click` event. That event, however, also bubbles up to the parent – the `p` element can receive and consume that event as needed.

But what does this actually mean? Well, you could attach an event listener to the `p` element:

```js
const p = document.querySelector("p");
p.addEventListener("click", (event) => {
  console.log(event.target);
});
```

Then, when you click on the `span` element you will see the text `Click me~!` logged to the console.

The event propagates to the parent `p` element, which consumes it in an event listener to display the target of the event.

Notice how the target is still the `span` element. This is because the `span` element received the initial click.

Just to be sure how things are working, let's expand our code:

```js
const p = document.querySelector("p");
const span = document.querySelector("span");
p.addEventListener("click", (event) => {
  console.log("P listener: ");
  console.log(event.target);
});
span.addEventListener("click", (event) => {
  console.log("Span listener: ");
  console.log(event.target);
});
```

To give you an idea of how the event bubbles up, here's what you'll see in the console after clicking the `span` element:

```html
"Span listener: "
<span>Click me~!</span>
"P listener: "
<span>Click me~!</span>
```

Now let's see what happens when you prevent the propagation of an event with `stopPropagation()`. We'll call it in our `span`'s event listener:

```js
const p = document.querySelector("p");
const span = document.querySelector("span");
p.addEventListener("click", (event) => {
  console.log("P listener: ");
  console.log(event.target);
});
span.addEventListener("click", (event) => {
  console.log("Span listener: ");
  console.log(event.target);
  event.stopPropagation();
});
```

And then click our `span` again:

```html
"Span listener: "
<span>Click me~!</span>
```

This time, we don't see our `p` listener trigger. The event never fires for the `p` element, because we told it to stop propagation while it was being processed for the child `span` element.

Event delegation can be thought of as the opposite. It's the process of taking a captured event, and delegating it to another element.

Going back to our code, let's update it so clicking on a `span` element changes it to red:

```js
const p = document.querySelector("p");
const span = document.querySelector("span");
p.addEventListener("click", (event) => {});
span.addEventListener("click", (event) => {
  event.target.style.color = "red";
});
```

But what if you have twenty `span` elements? Or maybe you use JavaScript to create more `span` elements on the fly?

Rather than having to attach an event listener to every single `span` element, you can actually use the listener on the `p` element for all of them. In other words, you can delegate the handling of the `span` clicks to the parent `p` element.

Our code might now look something like this:

```js
const p = document.querySelector("p");
p.addEventListener("click", (event) => {
  event.target.style.color = "red";
});
```

Notice how we no longer have any listener attached to the `span` element at all. You have properly delegated the event handling to the `p` element. But does it work?

Let's generate a few extra `span` elements and see:

```html
<p>
  <span>Click me~!</span>
  <span>Click me~!</span>
  <span>Click me~!</span>
  <span>Click me~!</span>
</p>
```

Now, each time we click on a `span`, that element's text will become red.
And just like that, with a single event listener we've properly allowed a `click` event to bubble up from `span` elements to the parent `p`, and delegated the logic for that `click` event to the `p` element.

Event propagation and delegation can be a complex topic, especially as you get into heavily nested elements like tables. You are encouraged to explore this further and experiment with some of the code we've written here.

</div>